Technical description
=====================

kmemcheck works by marking memory pages non-present. This means that whenever
somebody attempts to access the page, a page fault is generated. The page
fault handler notices that the page was in fact only hidden, and so it calls
on the kmemcheck code to make further investigations.

When the investigations are completed, kmemcheck "shows" the page by marking
it present (as it would be under normal circumstances). This way, the
interrupted code can continue as usual.

But after the instruction has been executed, we should hide the page again, so
that we can catch the next access too! Now kmemcheck makes use of a debugging
feature of the processor, namely single-stepping. When the processor has
finished the one instruction that generated the memory access, a debug
exception is raised. From here, we simply hide the page again and continue
execution, this time with the single-stepping feature turned off.


Changes to the memory allocator (SLUB)
======================================

kmemcheck requires some assistance from the memory allocator in order to work.
The memory allocator needs to

1. Request twice as much memory as would normally be needed. The bottom half
   of the memory is what the user actually sees and uses; the upper half
   contains the so-called shadow memory, which stores the status of each byte
   in the bottom half, e.g. initialized or uninitialized.
2. Tell kmemcheck which parts of memory should be marked uninitialized. There
   are actually a few more states, such as "not yet allocated" and "recently
   freed".

If a slab cache is set up using the SLAB_NOTRACK flag, it will never return
memory that can take page faults because of kmemcheck.

If a slab cache is NOT set up using the SLAB_NOTRACK flag, callers can still
request memory with the __GFP_NOTRACK flag. This does not prevent the page
faults from occurring, however, but marks the object in question as being
initialized so that no warnings will ever be produced for this object.


Problems
========

The most prominent problem seems to be that of bit-fields. kmemcheck can only
track memory with byte granularity. Therefore, when gcc generates code to
access only one bit in a bit-field, there is really no way for kmemcheck to
know which of the other bits will be used or thrown away. Consequently, there
may be bogus warnings for bit-field accesses. There is some experimental
support to detect this automatically, though it is probably better to work
around this by explicitly initializing whole bit-fields at once.

Some allocations are used for DMA. As DMA doesn't go through the paging
mechanism, we have absolutely no way to detect DMA writes. This means that
spurious warnings may be seen on access to DMA memory. DMA allocations should
be annotated with the __GFP_NOTRACK flag or allocated from caches marked
SLAB_NOTRACK to work around this problem.


Parameters
==========

In addition to enabling CONFIG_KMEMCHECK before the kernel is compiled, the
parameter kmemcheck=1 must be passed to the kernel when it is started in order
to actually do the tracking. So by default, there is only a very small
(probably negligible) overhead for enabling the config option.

Similarly, kmemcheck may be turned on or off at run-time using, respectively:

echo 1 > /proc/sys/kernel/kmemcheck
	and
echo 0 > /proc/sys/kernel/kmemcheck

Note that this is a lazy setting; once turned off, the old allocations will
still have to take a single page fault exception before tracking is turned off
for that particular page. Enabling kmemcheck on will only enable tracking for
allocations made from that point onwards.

The default mode is the one-shot mode, where only the first error is reported
before kmemcheck is disabled. This mode can be enabled by passing kmemcheck=2
to the kernel at boot, or running

echo 2 > /proc/sys/kernel/kmemcheck

when the kernel is already running.


Future enhancements
===================

There is already some preliminary support for catching use-after-free errors.
What still needs to be done is delaying kfree() so that memory is not
reallocated immediately after freeing it. [Suggested by Pekka Enberg.]

It should be possible to allow SMP systems by duplicating the page tables for
each processor in the system. This is probably extremely difficult, however.
[Suggested by Ingo Molnar.]

Support for instruction set extensions like XMM, SSE2, etc.
